This is version 2.0 of an interactive tutorial and simulation dealing with
cable theory.  To run the simulation, type "genesis Cable".  Clicking the
left mouse button in the box labelled "HELP" will pop up a menu of topics
for which you may obtain help.  This information is contained in several
"*.hlp" files, which you may wish to print.  The file "totry.hlp" contains
some suggested exercises.  The theory needed to understand this tutorial may
be found in Chapter 5 of "The Book of GENESIS" by James M. Bower and David
Beeman, published by TELOS/Springer, and in Chapter 2 of "Methods in
Neuronal Modeling", by Christof Koch and Idan Segev.

Please send any suggestions for additions or improvements to
dbeeman@boulder.colorado.edu.

The tutorial may also be used to teach some methods in the numerical
integration of the differential equations used in neuronal modeling.  Several
different methods (Forward Euler, Exponential Euler, second through fifth
order Adams-Bashforth, Backward Euler, and Crank-Nicholson) are available,
and the time step for the integration may be chosen.  One should note that
varying the diameter of the cable compartments can have a large effect on
the maximum allowable step size!

Note on the help display:

The default width of the windows used to display the help files has been set
to accomodate the larger font used with X11 revision 4 ("R4").  When running
the simulation on older DECstations and other machines which use X11 R3 with
its smaller font size, the windows will be wider than they need to be.
Although they may be resized with the mouse, the easiest way to change them
to an appropriate size is to edit the file "helpforms.g" and change the
statement near the beginning, 'XREV = "R4"' to 'XREV = "R3"'.
