
21.1.4 Creating new synaptic plasticity objects
===============================================

This documentation describes the implementation of the 'stdp_rules'
object, and how it may be used as a model for implementing synaptic
plasticity in a manner that is compatible with hsolve.

Background - synaptic plasticity and hsolve
-------------------------------------------

The object-oriented paradigm for scripting simulations in GENESIS 2 is
one of its most attractive features.  By isolating cell variables and
parameters into separate objects that communicate with 'messages' it
is easy to modify, share, and reuse pieces of simulation scripts
without needing to understand most details of the simulation from
which they were taken.  This modularity has also made it possible for
users with a little programming expertise to easily add new commands
or objects to GENESIS for different types of synaptic plasticity.

In order to avoid the inefficiency of this message-based approach at
the implementation level. The GENESIS 2 'hsolve' object was developed
to bypass the object-oriented implementation and allow fast cable
model solutions, as well as much more efficient delivery of spike
events to synaptically activated channels.  The computational speed
increases when highly connected network models are simulated with
hsolve are impressive, typically a factor of 10 to 20.  However, the
price for this efficiency is that only a subset of the GENESIS objects
can be used with hsolve, and it is not possible to modify these
objects without major changes to the simulator code.

As a result, it is not possible to use hsolve with cells that contain
a facsynchan, hebbsynchan, or a new variety of synchan that is created
by following the procedure givem in Doc/NewSynapticObjects.txt.
However, the synapse (which is a substructure of the synchan) is not
directly used by hsolve, so it is possible to modify the weights of a
synaptic connection, and even to add extra fields in addition to the
weight and delay.

The concept behind the 'stdp_rules' object is very general, but this
particular implementation is specific to the Song, Miller, and Abbott
(2000) (SMA) phenomenological model of spike timing dependent
plasticity (STDP). Rather than using a more biologically based model
that depends on calcium influx to the cell, the weight modification
rules are based on experimentally observed relationships between the
timing of pre and postsynaptic spikes, e.g. Dan and Poo (2004). It has
been adapted for compartmental models with continous conductance
changes, Hodgkin-Huxley channels, and axonal delays, rather than for
'point neuron' integrate and fire (IF) cells.

How to create a new synaptic plasticity object
----------------------------------------------

The commented simulation code in src/newconn/stdp_rules.c can be used
as a model for implementing other types of synaptic plasticity.  For
example, a reimplementation of the facsynchan to be hsolvable would
use another algorithm and variables to modify the standard synchan,
but will have much in common with the code used for 'stdp_rules'.

In order to create another plasticity 'rules' object to modify synchan
weights, begin with by studying the notes below on 'stdp_rules', and
the demonstration scripts in Scripts/stdp_rules. The README file in
that directory describes a script function 'apply_stdp_rules' that can
be called with a clocked 'script_out' object to perform the same
synaptic weight modifications as 'stdp_rules'. It will be slower, of
course, but it can be modfied as a prototype for a new variety of
hsolvable plasticity rules. After testing and refinement, the
prototyped plasticity model can be compiled into an object in a new
GENESIS library, by following the instructions in Doc/NewObjects.txt.

You will want to study these files in src/newconn in order to understand
the relationship between the SLI script and the C code implementation::

  Makefile   -- adds stdp_rules.o to OBJECTS
  newconnlib.g -- adds section for 'object stdp_rules stdp_rules_type StdpRules'
  newconn_struct.h -- added '#include "stdp_rules_struct.h"'; changed SYNAPSE_TYPE
  stdp_rules_struct.h -- defines struct stdp_rules_type for the object fields
  stdp_rules.c -- the source code for StdpRules() and functions
  synchan.c -- has additions to the 'EVENT' and 'RESET' cases

Modifications to synchan.c should be restricted to those that do not
affect the hsolvability of the synchan. In particular, no new messages
should be added, nor any changes to the PROCESS action. In this case,
synchan.c was modified to add the 'last_spike_time' field to each
synapse and set it to the time of the last presynaptic spike plus
delay in order to get the arrival time. This was done within the
'EVENT' case, where spike events are processed outside of hsolve.

Aplus and Aminus fields were added for use by stdp_rules or another
synapse modification object. The added field 'lastupdate' can be used
to store the time that the synapse weight, Aplus, and Aminus
fields were last updated. Other than initialization on RESET, these
three fields are not directly used by the synchan.

Overview of stdp_rules
----------------------

The 'stdp_rules' object (see Doc/stdp_rules.txt) is a clocked object
(usually with a step of about 1 msec) that examines pre and post
synaptic spike times of a cell or list of cells, and changes the
weight of each synapse accordingly.

At each clock step, for the cell (or in turn for each cell):

It gets the 'lastevent' field of the cell's spikegen to find when
it last spiked.  Comparing it with the current time tells if it has
spiked since the last clocked call of the function, or when it last
spiked.  The same thing is done for each of the synaptic connections
to this synapse, by examining the 'last_spike_time' field of the
synapse, in order to find the most recent presynaptic spike arrival
time. For example:

``getfield /cell[5]/dend/Ex_channel synapse[0].last_spike_time``

The relative timing of the pre- and post-synaptic spikes is used in
the STDP algorithm to adjust the weights.  In this implementation it
involves an exponential time window with a small number of parameters.
This gives higher negative or positive weight changes when the time
difference is small. (The change is negative if the pre-synaptic cell
fired later). For more details, see the Methods section of Song et
al. (2000).  

In particular, note that the SMA algorithm adds each weight change to
an ongoing exponentially decaying change from previous spike events,
rather than adding it directly to the current weight.  This provides a
type of 'momentum' term to keep weight changes moving in the same
direction. Using this approach instead of using a simple increase of
weight by a fixed increment required the addition of the 'Aplus' and
'Aminus' fields to the synapse.  The differences between these
approaches to weight modification is discussed in the paper by
Morrison, et al. (2008) For a description of an implementation of the
SMA rules in Python using the Brian simulator, see Stimberg et
al. (2104)

See also: synchan, spikegen, NewObjects, NewSynapticObjects

References
----------

Dan Y and Poo M (2004) Spike timing-dependent plasticity of neural
circuits. Neuron, 44:232-330.

Morrison A, Diesmann M, Gerstner W (2008) Phenomenological models of
synaptic plasticity based on spike timing. Biol. Cybern. 98: 459-478.

Song S, Miller KD, Abbott LF (2000) Competitive Hebbian learning
through spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity.
Nat. Neurosci. 3: 919â€“926.

Stimberg M, Goodman DFM, Benichoux V, Brette R (2014)
Equation-oriented specification of neural models for simulations.
Front. Neuroinf. 8: Article 6. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2014.00006
